Tomas Holderness is a research scientist at the MIT Urban Risk Lab where he develops new architectures for geospatial data collection, integration and analysis, to generate new modes of inquiry into the resilience of cities to extreme weather events. He directs the Urban Risk Map project, a platform for crowd-sourcing flood response, currently operational in Indonesia, India and the United States.

Tomas co-directs the development of CogniCity, a free and open source geosocial intelligence platform for hazard mapping and civic co-management during disasters which powers Urban Risk Map. In 2016 CogniCity was the recipient of a Showcase Award from the Open Data Institute in recognition of its contribution to flood response in Jakarta, Indonesia. As a geomatics specialist Tomas also contributes to OpenDroneMap, a tool to process aerial drone imagery, with a focus on the application of new imagery sources for urban and peri-urban sustainability, currently supported by the Humanitarian Innovation Fund.

In 2014 the Map Jakarta project, co-directed by Tomas, was awarded a Twitter #DataGrant for work on developing geosocial routines to map flooding. The results of this applied research project were featured in a number of online and print media including National Geographic, The Guardian, and The Wall Street Journal. Tomas’ work has also been cited as an example of best practice by the Federal Communications Commission, The Red Cross, and the United Nations Pulse Labs.

Previously, Tomas directed the Open Source Geospatial Laboratory at the SMART Infrastructure Facility in Australia, which developed spatial network modelling approaches for infrastructure assessments in data-scarce environments. In this role, and in collaboration with an international group of researchers Tomas was a co-recipient of the Institute of Civil Engineers’ 2015 James Hill Prize for the team’s paper on modelling sanitation networks in informal settlements in Africa, published in the journal Municipal Engineer.

Tomas is a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society where he holds the professional title of Chartered Geographer. Supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council he received his PhD from Newcastle University in the United Kingdom. He lives with his family in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
